---
title: Vim 101
description: A beginners guide for you to get started with vim.
isPublished: true
publishedDate: 2023/02/18
coverImage: /vim-101.jpeg
tags:
  - vim
  - programming
---

## Introduction
Vim is acronym for **Vi IM**proved. It is free and open source text editor written by Bram Moolenaar. It was first released in 1991 for UNIX variants and its main goal was to provide enhancement to the Vi editor, which was released way back in 1976.

Vim is considered as clone Vi editor. Like Vi, it is also command centric editor. One of the advantage of learning Vim is – it is available everywhere. Take any UNIX variant like Linux, Mac, HP-UX, AIX and many more, Vim is there by default. Vim traditionally does not have GUI but now there is separate installer called gVim which provides GUI.

## Features
- Its memory footprint is very low
- It is command centric. You can perform complex text related task with few commands
- It is highly configurable and uses simple text file to store its configuration
- There are many plug-in available for Vim. Its functionality can be extended in great manner using these plug-in
- It supports multiple windows. Using this feature screen can be split into multiple windows
- Same as multiple windows, it also supports multiple buffers
- It supports multiple tabs which allows to work on multiple files
- It supports recording features which allows to record and play Vim commands in repeated manner
- Extremely customizable

## Installation
If you are convinced with the features of Vim, then try it out your self.

### Windows
Vim doesn’t have any specific requirements. It is simple software bundle which provides all dependencies.
1.  Open a terminal
2.  Type this command to install vim
```powershell
winget install -e --id vim.vim
```
3.  Type `vim` to open it.

### Linux & macOS
Vim is already installed on all the Linux and UNIX platforms
1.  Type `vim` to open it.

## Commands & Navigation
As vim being keyboard centric editor, it basically has keyboard shortcuts for basically all the basic commands.

Vim has multiple modes. Here are three you need to know to do Vim basics:

| Mode         | Description                                 |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------- |
| Normal       | Default; for navigation and simple editing  |
| Insert       | For explicitly inserting and modifying text |
| Command Line | For operations like saving, exiting, etc.   |

Vim has other modes, like Visual, Select, and Ex-Mode, but Normal, Insert, and Command Line modes are good enough for us.

### How to navigate without arrow keys?
In vim without leaving the primary typing area, you can navigate easily. In cmd mode, use:
- `h` as left arrow
- `j` as below arrow
- `k` as up arrow
- `l` as right arrow

### How to save a file?
When you have edited you file, you have to know a way to save it as well. Normally editors have `Ctrl + s` as save command. If you haven't searched yet you will try to do the same. But here:

1. First you go to cmd mode (using `ESC`).
2. Now you press `:w <filename.extension>`
3. Or simply `:w` if you don’t want to create a new file

### How to quit vim?
Now the beginners really get frustrated at this. Well I definitely got. It is just because you realise at this point that why do i have to use a command for even the basic stuff. But if you use vim enough you will realise it is much faster this way and doesn't really require using mouse(cool right!). For this:

- type `:q` in cmd mode
- If you still aren't able to quit press `:q!`. Here `!` tells the editor to force quit. Similarly if you weren't able to save before you could have used `:w!`.

### Some useful commands to learn as a beginner

Now i will introduce some basic commands to tell how editing can be so fun with vim. And of course you need to remember to insert press `i` and to give command `ESC`.

- To indent a line :
    - From wherever you are in a line press `>>` in cmd mode(for forward indent). Similarly `<<` for backward indent.
- To go to top of your document:
    - From wherever you are just go to cmd mode and press `gg`
- To go to bottom of your document:
    - From wherever you are just go to cmd mode and press `G`
- To go to end of line and enter insert mode:
    - `A`
- To go to beginning of line and enter insert mode:
    - `I` (note this is capitalized)
- To delete current line (In vim delete and cut are very much the same thing):
    - `dd`
- To copy current line:
    - `yy`
    - In vim copying is called _yanking_. Hence the y.
- To Paste copied line:
    - `p`
    - will be pasted below the line under cursor.

### Combining Commands
In vim you can combine one or more command to have a better result. Examples:
To delete 2 lines below including current line:
-   `d2j`

To delete from line number 32 to 56:
-   `:32,56d`

Once you are aware of the basic commands these combinations come instinctively.

## Conclusion
For a beginner it might seem like a tedious task to learn so many commands to do even the basic stuff. But once you have a good amount of practice, you will find using other IDE based editors to be slower. Using you vimrc you will want to customize your editor in whatever ways possible. You don't have that level of luxury at root level in other editors. Here I have only scratched the surface of Vim. But I think it is enough to get you interested. Rest is up to you how deep you want to d
